"The Maze Runner" is a young-adult movie franchise set in a dystopian future. The teens are all smart, resilient - and exploited. The adults are mostly cruel, corrupt and duplicitous. Cities are crumbling. Landscapes are wasted.

So cold. So bleak. So dead.

So 2012.

That was when the first "Hunger Games" movie came out, and soon every studio was scrambling to find its own middle-school sci-fi saga. But although "Games" lasted four movies - after greedily stretching the last slim novel over two films - others were less lucky.

The "Divergent" series? Ran out of steam two-thirds of the way through its planned trilogy. "The 5th Wave"? Saw its first installment open, and close, and gave up then and there.

But while the sad sci-fi race may be over, "Maze Runner" - like its characters - is still staggering towards the finish line. And so here, at last, comes its third and final episode, "The Death Cure."

Well, if this is the end to the fad, it's a mercy killing.


The franchise's 2014 opener had a certain stripped-down freshness as teens awoke in a deadly arena, forced to fight to survive. The second one, the next year, filled in details - the kids were the adults' lab rats, used to find a cure for a plague - but confused things irretrievably.

Seriously, watching this third episode, I began to wonder: Had I even seen the second? Certainly the filmmakers had their doubts, too. Exposition was constantly shoehorned in, with flat-footed lines like "I thought you were dead!" and "Weren't you in love with her?"

As this final adventure begins, our hero Thomas, played by a perpetually distracted Dylan O'Brien, is leading a rebellion against the evil grown-ups' organization, World in Catastrophe: Killzone Experiment Department, or as it's referred to - I kid you not - WICKED. Even "Get Smart!" would have groaned at that one.

Complicating things is that the love of Thomas' life, Teresa, played by Kaya Scodelario, has turned traitor, and his best friend Minho, played by Ki Hong Lee, has been taken captive. Complicating things even further, of course, is that, three years after the last film, who cares?

Perhaps you do, in which case the nearly two-and-a-half-hours of this very loud movie will rush by. If not, though, you'll be left to your own devices, trying to stay awake by fixating on odd little details.


Like the teetering Melania heels and white labcoat outfit worn by Patricia Clarkson, as a chic scientist. Or Walton Goggins' "Phantom of the Opera" makeup as a rebel without a nose. Or why the heck we don't get more Barry Pepper in the movies.

Director Wes Ball, who had directed all three of these films - albeit no other features -- can certainly handle a big action scene. The film opens with an all-out assault on a speeding train, and even if it makes absolutely no sense, it is entertainingly shot and swiftly paced. Ditto the initial attack on WICKED's barricaded city, full of heart-pounding chases and explosive fights.

But the quiet scenes - all four of them - don't really evoke any emotion. And the movie refuses to end. Just when you think things are being wrapped up, they come unwrapped, and the picture goes on for another 40 minutes, prolonging your pain with a sadism that would make even the movie's sneering villain feel a bit guilty.

Until eventually we come to an end of yet another slice of angsty teen sci-fi, in which the future's so blighted they have to throw shade.

It's an odd thing. I remember being a teenager and reading Bradbury and Asimov and Clarke; I remember diving into speculative fiction which gave you hope about the world you were about to inherit. Today's books and films just seem designed to fill kids with dread about the mess that lies ahead.

I'm not saying it's wrong. I'm saying it's probably right. But I do feel sorry for them. And for audiences.

